Add initial documentation for Elastic Maps Server (#4447)
elastic/cloud-on-k8s: docs/orchestrating-elastic-stack-applications/maps.asciidoc

  volumes:
    - name: ems-storage
      persistentVolumeClaim:
       claimName: ems-basemap
  containers:
    - name: ems-setup
      image: ubuntu
      command: [bash, -c, "apt-get update && apt-get install unzip && while true; do sleep 10; done"]
      volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: "/usr/share/planet"
          name: ems-storage
----
. Use `kubectl` to copy the basemap data into the volume
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl cp planet.zip ems-data-setup:/usr/share/planet/planet.zip
----
. Unzip the archive on the temporary Pod
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl exec ems-data-setup -- unzip /usr/share/data/planet.zip -d /usr/share/planet
----
. Delete the temporary Pod and remount the volume into the {ems} Pods as shown <<{p}-maps-pod-configuration,below>>.
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl delete pod ems-data-setup
----

[id="{p}-maps-pod-configuration"]
=== Pod configuration
You can <<{p}-customize-pods,customize the {ems} Pod>> using a Pod template.

The following example demonstrates how to create a {ems} deployment which mounts a data volume with the complete basemap.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes"]
----
apiVersion: maps.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ElasticMapsServer
metadata:

>   name: ems-sample

Reviewer: Maybe keep the same name in the example, when the previous steps have been followed it helps the user to proceed with `kubectl apply -f` :
```suggestion
  name: quickstart
```

spec:

>   version: {version}

Reviewer: By default `count` is 0, also if the reference to Elasticsearch is missing the Pod fails to start:

```suggestion
  version: {version}
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: "quickstart"
  count: 1
```

The following example demonstrates how to create a {ems} deployment which mounts a data volume with the complete basemap.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes"]
----
apiVersion: maps.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ElasticMapsServer
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {version}
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: "quickstart"
  count: 1
  podTemplate:
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: maps
        volumeMounts:
        - name: map-data
          readOnly: true
          mountPath: /usr/src/app/data
      volumes:
        - name: map-data
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: ems-basemap

----

The name of the container in the Pod template must be `maps`.

[id="{p}-maps-advanced-configuration"]
== Advanced configuration

If you already looked at the <<{p}-elasticsearch-specification,Elasticsearch on ECK>> documentation, some of these concepts might sound familiar to you.
The resource definitions in ECK share the same philosophy when you want to:

* Customize the Pod configuration
* Customize the product configuration
* Manage HTTP settings

[id="{p}-maps-configuration"]
=== {ems} configuration

> You can add any valid {ems} setting as documented on the link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/maps-connect-to-ems.html#elastic-maps-server-configuration[product] page to the `spec.config` section.

Reviewer: Should we also document `spec.configRef` ?

Author: Yes, good point. Will add it.

The {ems} configuration file is automatically setup by ECK to establish a secure connection to Elasticsearch.
[id="{p}-maps-data"]
== Map data
The {ems} Docker image contains only a few zoom levels of data. In order to get the map data up to the highest zoom level {ems} needs a basemap file mounted into its container.
[id="{p}-maps-basemap-download"]
=== Basemap download
You have to download the basemap ahead of time on a machine that is not air-gapped and populate a volume that can be mounted into the {ems} Pods.   See also the link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/maps-connect-to-ems.html#elastic-maps-server[{ems} documentation.]

The exact procedure of how to get a Kubernetes volume populated with that data is out of scope of this documenation as it depends on your specific Kubernetes setup and choice of volume provisioner. One possible approach that should work for most setups is as follows:

. Download the basemap zip archive using the link  shown in the {ems} UI or extracted from the  `/status` endpoint.

> . Create a PersistentVolumeClaim of sufficient size (> 90G) and a temporary Pod to mount the corresponding volume

Reviewer: I guess we don't want to load the data in the EMS Pod because of the `readOnly: true` section. I am wondering how much mandatory the `readOnly` setting is. Do we expect the EMS containers to concurrently write in the volume ? (I'm just wondering if there is a way to avoid this temporary Pod)

Author: I think it is not mandatory at all. Let me see if we can simplify this further.

Author: The problem is that we mount on top of the basemap file that comes with the Docker image. So initially there will be no basemap file until we manage to copy it into the volume. However the Pod will boot loop because the container cannot run without a basemap.

Reviewer: 👍 , makes sense, thank you for the clarification.

=== Load balancer settings and TLS SANs

By default a `ClusterIP` link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/[service] is created and associated with the maps deployment.
If you want to expose maps externally with a link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#loadbalancer[load balancer], it is recommended to include a custom DNS name or IP in the self-generated certificate.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes"]
----
apiVersion: maps.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ElasticMapsServer
metadata:
  name: maps-sample
spec:
  version: {version}
  count: 1
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: "elasticsearch-sample"
  http:
    service:
      spec:
        type: LoadBalancer # default is ClusterIP
    tls:
      selfSignedCertificate:
        subjectAltNames:
        - ip: 1.2.3.4
        - dns: maps.example.com
----

[id="{p}-maps-http-custom-tls"]
=== Provide your own certificate

If you want to use your own certificate, the required configuration is identical to Elasticsearch. See <<{p}-custom-http-certificate>>.

[id="{p}-maps-http-disable-tls"]
=== Disable TLS

You can disable the generation of the self-signed certificate and hence disable TLS.

> [source,yaml,subs="attributes"]

Reviewer: Same here, should we just add a link to https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/current/k8s-tls-certificates.html#k8s-disable-tls ?

== Connect to an Elasticsearch cluster

experimental[]

{ems} needs a connection to Elasticseach to verify the installed license. You define the connection via the `elasticsearchRef` attribute:

[source,yaml,subs="attributes"]
----
apiVersion: maps.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ElasticMapsServer
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {version}
  count: 1
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: quickstart
    namespace: default
----

The use of `namespace` is optional if the Elasticsearch cluster is running in the same namespace as {ems}.

NOTE: Any {ems} can reference (and thus access) any Elasticsearch instance as long as they are both in namespaces that are watched by the same ECK instance. ECK will copy the required Secret from Elasticsearch to the {ems} namespace. {ems} cannot automatically connect to Elasticsearch (through `elasticsearchRef`) in a namespace managed by a different ECK instance. For more information, see <<{p}-restrict-cross-namespace-associations,Restrict cross-namespace resource associations>>.

The {ems} configuration file is automatically setup by ECK to establish a secure connection to Elasticsearch.

[id="{p}-maps-data"]
== Map data

experimental[]

> The {ems} Docker image contains only a few zoom levels of data. In order to get the map data up to the highest zoom level {ems} needs a basemap file mounted into its container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {ems} Docker image contains only a few zoom levels of data. To get the map data up to the highest zoom level, {ems} needs a basemap file mounted into its container.
```

[id="{p}-maps-basemap-download"]
=== Basemap download

> You have to download the basemap ahead of time on a machine that is not air-gapped and populate a volume that can be mounted into the {ems} Pods.  See also the link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/maps-connect-to-ems.html#elastic-maps-server[{ems} documentation.]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You have to download the basemap ahead of time on a machine that is not air-gapped and populate a volume that can be mounted into the {ems} Pods. See also the link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/maps-connect-to-ems.html#elastic-maps-server[{ems} documentation.]
```

> The exact procedure of how to get a Kubernetes volume populated with that data is out of scope of this documenation as it depends on your specific Kubernetes setup and choice of volume provisioner. One possible approach that should work for most setups is as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The procedure on how to get a Kubernetes volume populated with that data is outside the scope of this document, as it depends on your specific Kubernetes setup and choice of volume provisioner. This is a possible approach that works for most setups:
```

. Download the basemap zip archive using the link shown in the {ems} UI or extracted from the `/status` endpoint.

> . Create a PersistentVolumeClaim of sufficient size (> 90G) and a temporary Pod to mount the corresponding volume

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Create a PersistentVolumeClaim of sufficient size (> 90G) and a temporary Pod to mount the corresponding volume.
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: ems-basemap
spec:
  storageClassName: "standard"
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 250G
---
kind: Pod
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: ems-data-setup
spec:
  terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
  volumes:
    - name: ems-storage
      persistentVolumeClaim:
       claimName: ems-basemap
  containers:
    - name: ems-setup
      image: ubuntu
      command: [bash, -c, "apt-get update && apt-get install unzip && while true; do sleep 10; done"]
      volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: "/usr/share/planet"
          name: ems-storage
----
. Use `kubectl` to copy the basemap data into the volume
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl cp planet.zip ems-data-setup:/usr/share/planet/planet.zip
----
. Unzip the archive on the temporary Pod
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl exec ems-data-setup -- unzip /usr/share/data/planet.zip -d /usr/share/planet
----

> . Delete the temporary Pod and remount the volume into the {ems} Pods as shown <<{p}-maps-pod-configuration,below>>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Delete the temporary Pod and remount the volume into the {ems} Pods as described in <<{p}-maps-pod-configuration,Pod configuration>>.
```

* Customize the Pod configuration
* Customize the product configuration
* Manage HTTP settings

[id="{p}-maps-configuration"]
=== {ems} configuration
You can add any valid {ems} setting as documented on the link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/maps-connect-to-ems.html#elastic-maps-server-configuration[product] page to the `spec.config` section.

The following example demonstrates how to set the log level to `debug`:

[source,yaml,subs="attributes"]
----
apiVersion: maps.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ElasticMapsServer
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {version}
  count: 1
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: "elasticsearch-sample"
  config:
     logging.level: debug
----

Alternatively, settings can be provided via a Secret specified in the `configRef` element:
[source,yaml,subs="attributes,+macros"]
----
apiVersion: maps.k8s.elastic.co/v1alpha1
kind: ElasticMapsServer
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {version}
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: elasticsearch-sample
  configRef:
    secretName: maps-config
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: maps-config
stringData:
  elastic-maps-server.yml: |-
    logging.level: debug
----

> Refer to <<{p}-compute-resources-kibana-and-apm>> for adjusting compute resources for {ems}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Refer to <<{p}-compute-resources-kibana-and-apm>> for adjusting compute resources for {ems}.
```

[id="{p}-maps-scaling"]
=== Scale out an {ems} deployment

> To deploy more than one instance of maps, all the instances must mount the data volume containing the basemap read only. Once that is the case scaling out is just a matter of increasing the `count` attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To deploy more than one instance of maps, all the instances must mount the data volume containing the basemap read only. When this is done, scaling out is just a matter of increasing the `count` attribute.
```

[id="{p}-maps-http-configuration"]
== HTTP configuration

experimental[]

[id="{p}-maps-http-publish"]
=== Load balancer settings and TLS SANs

By default a `ClusterIP` link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/[service] is created and associated with the {ems} deployment.
If you want to expose maps externally with a link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#loadbalancer[load balancer], it is recommended to include a custom DNS name or IP in the self-generated certificate.

Refer to <<{p}-static-ip-custom-domain>> for more details.

[id="{p}-maps-http-custom-tls"]
=== Provide your own certificate

If you want to use your own certificate, the required configuration is identical to Elasticsearch. See <<{p}-custom-http-certificate>>.

[id="{p}-maps-http-disable-tls"]
=== Disable TLS

You can disable the generation of the self-signed certificate and hence disable TLS. See <<{p}-disable-tls>>.

[id="{p}-maps-ingress"]
==== Ingress and Kibana configuration

> In order to use {ems} from your Kibana instances you need to configure Kibana to fetch maps from your {ems} instance by using the link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/maps-connect-to-ems.html#elastic-maps-server-kibana[`map.emsUrl`] configuration key. The value of this setting needs to be the URL where the {ems} instance is reachable from your browser. In order to work correctly the certificates presented by {ems} need to be trusted by the browser and the URL should have the same origin as the URL where your Kibana is hosted to avoid cross origin resource issues.  Please see the link:{eck_github}/tree/{eck_release_branch}/config/recipes/[recipe section] for an example how to set this up using an Ingress resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use {ems} from your Kibana instances, you need to configure Kibana to fetch maps from your {ems} instance by using the link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/maps-connect-to-ems.html#elastic-maps-server-kibana[`map.emsUrl`] configuration key. The value of this setting needs to be the URL where the {ems} instance is reachable from your browser. The certificates presented by {ems} need to be trusted by the browser, and the URL must have the same origin as the URL where your Kibana is hosted to avoid cross origin resource issues. See the link:{eck_github}/tree/{eck_release_branch}/config/recipes/[recipe section] for an example on how to set this up using an Ingress resource.
```
